Please forgive me if I already sent you this info.


My usual speech about the Free Software Movement and GNU takes between
2 and 2.5 hours.  That typically includes over one and a half hours of
my speaking, plus plenty of time for questions, because people usually
want to ask a lot of questions.

I can manage to squeeze a speech into an hour, but some topics will be
omitted and there will be no time for questions.  Once we are going to
the trouble and expense of having me come and speak, we may as well do
a thorough job of it.

A typical title would be this:

    The Free Software Movement and the GNU/Linux Operating System

There are other topics I speak about, such as

    Copyright vs Community in the Age of Computer Networks

and

    The Danger of Software Patents

These topics take just an hour.

I can also possibly speak about some other topic if you suggest one.


Abstract:

For a speech about the Free Software Movement and GNU/Linux, you
can use this abstract:

    Richard Stallman will speak about the purpose, goals, philosophy,
    methods, status, and future prospects of the GNU operating system,
    which in combination with the kernel Linux is now used by an
    estimated 17 to 20 million users world wide.

For Copyright vs Community, you can use this abstract:

    Copyright developed in the age of the printing press, and was designed
    to fit with the system of centralized copying imposed by the printing
    press.  But the copyright system does not fit well with computer
    networks, and only draconian punishments can enforce it.

    The global corporations that profit from copyright are lobbying
    for draconian punishments, and to increase their copyright powers,
    while suppressing public access to technology.  But if we
    seriously hope to serve the only legitimate purpose of
    copyright--to promote progress, for the benefit of the
    public--then what must be done is either to reduce copyright
    powers or effectively eliminate them, depending on the kind of
    work.  Governments must now protect the public's right to copy.


Facilities:

A microphone is desirable if the room is large, but I have a very loud
voice.  A supply of tea with milk and sugar would be nice; otherwise,
non-diet pepsi will do (I dislike the taste of coke, and of all diet
soda).  If it is good tea, I like it without milk and sugar.  No other
facilities are needed.


Languages:

I can speak in English or French.  I once gave a speech in Spanish,
but it took about twice as long as it normally should, so I cannot
commit to giving a speech in Spanish.

If the audience won't be comfortable with a language I can speak, it
is important to have a translator.

For the speech on Free Software and the GNU/Linux System, only
simultaneous translation is feasible.  The speech (with questions)
normally lasts over two hours; to use consecutive translation would
double that to four hours.  I don't want it to take that much time
even if the audience does.


Publicity:

The GNU Project constantly struggles against two widespread mistakes
that undermine the effectiveness of our work: calling our work "open
source", and calling the GNU operating system "Linux".

The Free Software Movement and the Open Source Movement are like two
political parties in our community.  I founded the Free Software
Movement in 1984 along with the GNU Project; we call our work "free
software" because it is software that respects the users freedom.  The
Open Source Movement was founded, in 1998, specifically to reject our
idealistic philosophy--they studiously avoid talking about freedom.  I
do not agree with or support the Open Source Movement, and I expect
you to take care, in arranging my speech, to make that quite clear.

In all the publicity for the event (web site, email announcements,
conference programs, direct mail, signs, etc), please use the term
"free software", not "open source", when you refer to my work.  This
includes to the title and descriptions of my speech, of the session it
is in, of the track it is part of, and of the event itself.  (See
http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-software-for-freedom.html for
more explanation of the difference.)

Of course, some of these names and descriptions won't refer to my work
at all; for example, if a track or the whole event covers a much
broader topic in which free software is just a small part, its name
may not refer to free software.  That is normal and appropriate.  The
point is not to ask you to refer to my work more often than you
normally would, but that you should describe it accurately whenever
you do refer to it.

If other speakers in the same session, track, or event want their work
to be categorized as "open source", that is a legitimate request for
them to make.  In that case, please give "free software" equal mention
with "open source".

If you wish, it is ok to explain free software by saying that "since
1998, another group has used the term `open source' to describe a
similar activity."  That will tell people that my work has a
relationship with something else they may have heard of, without
implying that term ought to be applied to my work.

The other great mistake is speaking of a "Linux operating system".
The system in question, the system that Debian and Red Hat distribute,
the system that 20 million people use, is basically the GNU operating
system, with Linux added as the kernel.  When people call our system
"Linux", they deny us the credit for our work, and this is not right.
(See http://www.gnu.org/gnu/linux-and-gnu.html for more explanation.)

In all the publicity, in the titles and description of the session,
track, event, etc., please call this combined operating system
"GNU/Linux", if and when you have reason to refer to it.  Likewise,
please don't use a penguin in connection with my talk or in any way as
a symbol for my work.  The penguin stands for "Linux".  The symbol of
GNU is a gnu, so if you want to use a graphical image to symbolize my
work, please use a gnu.

If you have handled these issues properly, nobody who looks at your
material will get the impression that I work on "open source", or that
I agree with "open source", or that my work is "part of Linux", or
that I participated in the "development of Linux", or that GNU is the
name of "a collection of tools".


Changes of plans:

Don't assume that I can still come if you change the date.  My
schedule is tight.  If you change the date by even one day, I may be
unable to come.  However, depending on the rest of my schedule, it is
also possible I might welcome the change.  Please consult with me
before making any change.  I will certainly be flexible if I can.


Scheduling other meetings:

I have agreed to give one speech for you, and if the press wants to
talk with me, I will do that for the sake of the cause.  I have not
agreed to additional speeches or private meetings of any kind.  If you
would like me to do any other speeches or meetings, please ask me
first about each one.

Many people assume that because I am travelling, I am having a
vacation, that I have no other work to do, and I can spend the whole
day speaking or meeting with people or whatever they feel might be
suitable to fill up a visitor's time.  THAT IS NOT THE CASE FOR ME.

I have no vacations.  I have to spend 6 to 8 hours *every day* doing
my usual work, which is responding to email about the GNU Project and
the Free Software Movement.  Work comes in every day for me, and I
have to do it every day, wherever I am.  During the week I fall
behind; on weekends I try to catch up.  The only reason I can travel
at all is that I bring my laptop so I can work wherever I go.

If I am visiting an interesting place, I might want to be able to do a
few hours of sightseeing in between the work.  But don't try to plan
sightseeing for me without asking me first--I can only spare a little
time for it, so I am very selective about where to go.  Don't assume I
want to see something because it is customary to take visitors there.

This means I will be very very busy during my visit.  So you must ask
me *in advance* about *each* additional speech, meeting, or other
activity that would take time.  I may say yes, but I also may say no.

Remember that an additional speech, even if it is just a one-hour
speech, probably means two hours or more, including travel time.


Interviews:

I am glad to give interviews to the press about the GNU Project.
Please ask journalists to *see my speech first*.  My speeches are not
technical; they focus on precisely the sort of philosophical questions
that a journalist would probably want to cover.  If the journalist
does not attend my speech, he will probably start by asking me to tell
him the same things that I said in the speech.  That is inefficient.

Alternatively the journalist can read http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/,
http://www.gnu.org/gnu/linux-and-gnu.html, and
http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-software-for-freedom.html before
the interview.

If you want to schedule a press conference, please ***plan the time
of my speech to allow a press conference after it***.  Find out from
journalists what times are good for them, then schedule the
press conference, then schedule the speech before it!


Putting my speech on the net:

If you would like to put my speech on the Internet, that is ok
provided you can make sure that a user can see it on a GNU/Linux
system using only free software.  For instance, this means RealAudio
is unacceptable.  Please make sure everyone who might be involved in
broadcasting the event, or who might be directly or indirectly
involved in planning such a broadcast, knows this.


Warning about giveways:

You may find companies offering you CD-ROMs, books, fliers or
publicity materials to give away or sell at my speech.  Please check
them before you accept them, to make sure that they don't promote the
very thing that we are working to replace.

For instance, the CDs may contain non-free software.  Most commercial
CDs of GNU/Linux contain non-free software in addition to the free
software.  If it isn't the official Debian GNU/Linux system, it almost
surely contains non-free software, so please don't hand it out or
offer it at my speech.  Even if it contains the official Debian
GNU/Linux system, the company that made it may have added some
non-free software to that.

Books about use of the GNU/Linux system and about GNU programs are
fine if they are free as well.  But many of them are non-free (see
http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-doc.html).  To see if a book is
free, check the license on the back of the title page.  If it uses the
GNU Free Documentation License, or the Open Publication License
version 1 without options A and B, then it is free.  If it isn't one
of those, show me the license and I will tell you if it is a free
license.

If you get publicity materials for companies, please check with me
before giving them out.


Flights:

I am travelling most of the time, and most of my trips include several
stops.  Chances are your city is neither the first nor the last stop
in the trip.

Many organizations ask to buy the tickets and send them to me.  That
is ok with me, but it assumes the trip goes to just one city.  It
won't work for a multi-destination trip, unless you want to pay for
the whole trip.  So normally I buy the tickets myself and get
reimbursed by the various places I am visiting.  For a
multi-destination trip, we will need to agree on what travel expenses
you should cover.

Some organizations feel that hospitality calls for providing me with a
business class ticket.  That is indeed more comfortable, but an
economy class seat is good enough even on an overnight flight if it is
a window seat.  Meanwhile, speaking is my main source of income, and
the extra price of a business class ticket would be a lot more useful
for me if I can spend it on something else.  So if you were thinking
of spending extra for business class, how about if you get pay the
extra to me as a speaker's fee instead?

I normally try to arrive more than 24 hours before the speech; that
way, even if there is a problem with the flights, there is still a
good chance I can arrive in time for the speech.


Accommodations:

I am willing to stay in a hotel if that is the way you want to do it.

But if there is anyone who wants to offer a spare couch, or even some
spare floor, I would much rather stay there than in a hotel (assuming
I could have some privacy by closing a door).  Staying with someone is
more fun for me than a hotel, and it would also save you money.  Floor
space is sufficient, because I bring an air mattress with me.

Note, however, that in a hot and/or humid place I need air
conditioning or I will be unable to sleep.  Above 72 fahrenheit (22
centigrade) it becomes difficult when there is high humidity.

I sometimes like cats, but they are not good for me; I am somewhat
allergic to them.  So I need the bed and the room I will usually be
staying in to be clean of cat hair.  It is no problem if there is a
cat elsewhere in the house.  Dogs that sometimes jump up on people
frighten me unless they are tiny.

If you put me in a hotel, I expect you to cover the costs of the
telephone calls I will need to transfer my email.  Some hotels charge
a lot of money for this.


Beds:

Many people like hard beds, but they cause me muscle aches that keep
me awake.  In general there is no way you can determine for me whether
a bed is too hard; hardness is relative and we do not know how your
standards compare with mine.  But one data point is that futons are
always too hard for me.  I have tried many futons, and every one of
them was painful.  So if it isn't distinctly softer than every futon
you have ever seen, it is too hard.

If you don't know for a fact that I can sleep on the bed you have in
mind, please arrange to have on hand either a vacuum cleaner or a hair
dryer with a "cool" setting, so I can to inflate my air mattress if I
need it.

Hotel beds are often very hard; I cannot necessarily sleep on the bed
in the hotel.  But at least we can count on a hotel to have a vacuum
cleaner.

In case you are wondering, I cannot feel a pea under a mattress, but I
might feel a peanut under a hard mattress.


Paying me a reimbursement or a fee:

Please pay my reimbursement or fee to me personally; do not send it to
the FSF.  The FSF and I have completely separate finances, and the FSF
never covers my travel.  The FSF welcomes donations, but please make
sure that money intended to me is not sent to them, because that would
cause headaches for their accountants as well as for me.

My assistant is not involved with my finances, so he cannot help you
with that.  Please send such questions to me directly.

If you pay me by check, and you're not in the US, make sure to get a
check that lists a corresponding US bank--otherwise it will cost me a
fee to deposit the check.  Please mail the check to:

  Richard Stallman
  545 Tech Sq rm 425
  Cambridge, MA 02139
  USA

Do not mail it to the FSF!

A wire transfer is also a good method for paying me, but note that a
fee is always charged for making the transfer--please don't take that
out of what you're paying me.  I will send you the coordinates; just
ask if you need them.  Cash is also fine.

If you are outside the US, please convert your currency to dollars in
your bank, then use one of the above methods to pay me the dollars.
My bank gives very bad exchange rates; yours is surely better.

If you want an invoice, I will be glad to give you one.  Please find
out in advance whether you need one and what you need in it, so that
we can work out what it should say by email before I arrive; then you
can print it for me and I can sign it during my visit.


Email:

It is very important for me to be able to transfer email between my
laptop and the net, so I can do my ordinary work.  While travelling, I
often need to do the work and the transfer late at night, or in the
morning before a departure.  So please set up a way I can connect to
the net from the place I am staying.  I already have ISPs to call in
the US and in some other places; elsewhere, please find me somewhere I
can call if there is no other method available.  (Hotel phone fees may
be significant, and I expect you to cover them.)  If you have a
computer on the net which has a floppy drive, I can do the
communication via that computer.


Food:

I enjoy delicious food, and I like most kinds of cooking if they are
done well (the exception being that I cannot eat anything very spicy).
So I like to go to restaurants that are good at whatever kind of food
they do.  I don't arrive with specific preferences for what kind of
food--rather, I want to have whatever is good where I am: maybe the
local cuisine, or the food of an immigrant ethnic group which is
present in large numbers, or something unusual and original.

So it would be nice for you to ask around among your acquaintances to
find people who like good food and are familiar with the area's
restaurants.  They will be able to give good recommendations.


Sightseeing:

I enjoy doing some sightseeing when I travel, though the time I can
spare for this is limited.  (My trip is not a vacation.)  I enjoy
natural beauty such as mountains and rocky coasts, ancient buildings,
impressive and unusual modern buildings, and trains.  I like caves,
and if there is a chance to go caving I would enjoy that.  (I am just
a novice as a caver.)

If there is a chance to watch folk dancing, I would probably enjoy
that.  I tend to like music that has a feeling of dance in it, but I
sometimes like other kinds too.  However, I generally dislike the
various genres that are popular in the US, such as rock, country, rap,
reggae, techno, and composed American "folk".  If you tell me what is
available, I can tell you if I am interested.

If there is something else interesting and unique, please tell me
about it.  Maybe I will be interested.


More arrangements:

Once we have a precise date for the speech, my assistant, Brad Kuhn,
will contact you with questions about the arrangements for the trip.
Please respond as soon as possible with the information he asks for.

