Here's the info packet about my speeches.

My usual speech about the Free Software Movement and GNU takes between
2 and 2.5 hours.  That typically includes over one and a half hours of
my speaking, plus plenty of time for questions, because people usually
want to ask a lot of questions.

I can manage to squeeze a speech on this topic into an hour, but some
subtopics will be omitted and there will be no time for questions.
Once we are going to the trouble and expense of having me come and
speak, we may as well do a thorough job of it.

A typical title would be this:

    The Free Software Movement and the GNU/Linux Operating System

There are other topics I speak about, such as

    Copyright vs Community in the Age of Computer Networks

and

    The Danger of Software Patents

These topics take just an hour.

I can also possibly speak about some other topic if you suggest one.


Abstract:

For a speech about the Free Software Movement and GNU/Linux, you
can use this abstract:

    Richard Stallman will speak about the goals and philosophy of the
    Free Software Movement, and the status and history the GNU
    operating system, which in combination with the kernel Linux is
    now used by tens of millions of users world-wide.

For Copyright vs Community, you can use this abstract:

    Copyright developed in the age of the printing press, and was designed
    to fit with the system of centralized copying imposed by the printing
    press.  But the copyright system does not fit well with computer
    networks, and only draconian punishments can enforce it.

    The global corporations that profit from copyright are lobbying
    for draconian punishments, and to increase their copyright powers,
    while suppressing public access to technology.  But if we
    seriously hope to serve the only legitimate purpose of
    copyright--to promote progress, for the benefit of the
    public--then we must make changes in the other direction.

For Against Software Patents, you can use this abstract:

    Richard Stallman will explain how software patents obstruct
    software development.  Software patents are patents that cover
    software ideas.  They restrict the development of software, so
    that every design decision brings a risk of getting sued.  Patents
    in other fields restrict factories, but software patents restrict
    every computer user.  Economic research shows that they even
    retard progress.


Photo:

There is a black-and-white photograph of me as a
5820K Encapsulated Postscript file (http://www.stallman.org/rms-bw.eps)
3762K JPEG file (http://www.stallman.org/rms-bw.jpeg), and
5815K TIFF file (http://www.stallman.org/rms-bw.tiff).


Asking for the text:

I don't write my speeches in advance--it would take too much time.
However, transcripts of my past speeches are available.


Participation in a larger event:

I am selective about what sorts of events I am willing to participate
in.  If you are inviting me to speak at a larger event, please make
sure I am informed of the overall nature of the event, so I can make a
decision about whether I really want to participate.

I usually decline to participate in "open source" or "Linux" events.


Erecting a larger event:

If you are thinking of erecting a larger event around my speech,
please talk with me about the plans for such a larger event before
proceeding with them.  I want to make sure the event entirely supports
what I am trying to achieve.


Facilities:

A microphone is desirable if the room is large, but I have a very loud
voice, so I don't need one for a small or medium room.  A supply of
tea with milk and sugar would be nice; otherwise, non-diet pepsi will
do (I dislike the taste of coke, and of all diet soda).  If it is good
tea, I like it without milk and sugar.  No other facilities are
needed.


Languages:

I can speak in English or French.  I can give a speech in Spanish
if I have several days to practice the language before speaking.

If the audience won't be comfortable with a language I can speak, it
is important to have a translator.

For the full speech on Free Software and the GNU/Linux System, the
only feasible kind of translation is simultaneous translation.  The
speech (with questions) normally lasts over two hours; to use
consecutive translation would double that to four hours.  That is too
long.


Restricting admission:

If you plan to restrict admission to my speech, or charge a fee for
admission, please discuss this with me in advance and get my approval
for the plan.  I'm not categorically against limiting admission or
fees, but excluding people means the speech does less good, so I want
to make sure that the limitations are as small as necessary.  For
instance, you can allow students and low-paid people and political
activists to get in free, even if professionals have to pay.  We will
discuss what to do.


Sponsors:

If corporations sponsor my talk, I am willing to include a small
tasteful note of thanks in announcements and brochures, but no more
than that.  There should be no descriptions of their products or
services, and no banners with their names.  If a would-be sponsor
insists on more than that, we have to do without that sponsor.

If my speech is part of a pre-existing larger event that I have agreed
to participate in, I can't impose such conditions for the whole event.
However, if banners will be on display next to me while I am speaking,
that is rather obnoxious; if they advertise organizations that I
disapprove of on ethical grounds (which is not unlikely) I would want
to take them down, cover them up, or turn them off during my speech.


Publicity:

The GNU Project constantly struggles against two widespread mistakes
that undermine the effectiveness of our work: calling our work "open
source", and calling the GNU operating system "Linux".  Another very
bad mistake is using the term "intellectual property".

The Free Software Movement and the Open Source Movement are like two
political parties in our community.  I founded the Free Software
Movement in 1984 along with the GNU Project; we call our work "free
software" because it is software that respects the users freedom.  The
Open Source Movement was founded, in 1998, specifically to reject our
idealistic philosophy--they studiously avoid talking about freedom.
See http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-software-for-freedom.html for
more explanation of the difference between the two movements.

So please make sure that all the publicity about the event (web site,
email announcements, conference programs, direct mail, signs, etc),
uses the term "free software", not "open source", when you refer to my
work.  This includes to the title and descriptions of my speech, of
the session it is in, of the track it is part of, and of the event
itself.

Of course, some of these names and descriptions may not refer to this
work at all; for example, if a track or the whole event covers a much
broader topic in which free software is just a small part, its name
may not refer to free software.  That is normal and appropriate.  The
point is not to ask you to refer to my work more often than you
normally would, but that you should describe it accurately whenever
you do refer to it.

If other speakers in the same session, track, or event want their work
to be categorized as "open source", that is a legitimate request for
them to make.  In that case, please give "free software" equal mention
with "open source".

If you think it is useful to tell people how free software relates to
open source, you can say that "since 1998, another group has used the
term `open source' to describe a related activity."  That will tell
people that my work has a relationship with "open source", which they
may have heard of, without implying it is right to describe my work as
"open source."

The other widespread confusion is the idea of a "Linux operating
system".  The system in question, the system that Debian and Red Hat
distribute, the system that 20 million people use, is basically the
GNU operating system, with Linux added as the kernel.  When people
call the whole system "Linux", they deny us the credit for our work,
and this is not right.  (See http://www.gnu.org/gnu/linux-and-gnu.html
for more explanation.)

So please call this combined operating system "GNU/Linux" in all
the publicity, in the titles and description of the session, track,
event, etc., if and when you have reason to refer to it.

For similar reasons, please don't use a penguin as a symbol for my
work, or on the posters or notices for my speech.  The penguin stands
for "Linux"; the symbol of GNU is a gnu.  So if you want to use a
graphical image to symbolize GNU or my work, please use a gnu.

If you have handled these issues well, nobody who looks at your
material will get the impression that I work on "open source", or that
I support "open source", or that my work is "part of Linux", or that I
participated in the "development of Linux", or that GNU is the name of
"a collection of tools".

As for the term "intellectual property", that spreads confusion and
hostile bias.  See http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/words-to-avoid.html
for explanation.  I hope you will decide to reject that expression, as
I do; but in any case, don't use it in connection with my speech.


At the speech:

Please arrange for someone to hand out and collect our "contact cards".

   FSF would like to keep in touch with those who support us, to give
   you updates on what we are doing and how you can help.  If you are
   willing, Dr. Stallman asks that you fill out these contact cards,
   which he can take back with him so you can receive updates about
   FSF.  The FSF will not release this information unless forced to.

In some cases I can bring preprinted contact cards or the FSF can ship
them to you.  Otherwise we can send you a file and you can print them.
A week before the talk, please ask me which one it will be.


Changes of plans:

Don't assume that I can still come if you change the date.  My
schedule is tight.  If you change the date by even one day, I may be
unable to come.  However, I will certainly be flexible if there is no
obstacle.  Please consult with me before making any change, and I will
see what I can do.


Scheduling other meetings:

I have agreed to give a speech for you, and if the press wants to talk
with me, I will do that for the sake of the cause.  However, if you
would like me to give additional speeches or go to additional
meetings, please ask me first.  Please ask me about *each* activity
you would like me to perform.

Many people assume that because I am travelling, I am having a
vacation--that I have no other work to do, so I can spend the whole
day speaking or meeting with people.  Some hosts even feel that they
ought to try to fill up my time as a matter of good hospitality.
Nothing could be further from the truth.

The fact is, I have no vacations.  I have to spend 6 to 8 hours *every
day* doing my usual work, which is responding to email about the GNU
Project and the Free Software Movement.  Work comes in every day for
me, and if I skip it one day, I have to work double another day.
During the week I usually fall behind; on weekends I try to catch up.

Travelling takes up time, so I will be extra busy during my visit.  So
please ask me *in advance* about *each* additional speech, meeting, or
other activity that would take time.  I don't mind being asked, and I
may say yes, but I also may say no.

Remember that an additional speech, even if it is just a one-hour
speech, probably takes up two hours or more when you count the travel
time.


Interviews:

I am glad to give interviews to the press about the GNU Project, but
before I do, I want to be sure they will not repeat the two common
mistakes (calling the whole system "Linux" and associating GNU or me
with "open source").  Please explain this, and ask the journalist if
he will agree to call the system "GNU/Linux" in the article, and to
make it clear that our work is "free software" not "open source".
Recommend reading http://www.gnu.org/gnu/linux-and-gnu.html and
http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-software-for-freedom.html for
explanations of these issues.  If the journalist agrees, then I agree
to an interview.  Please have this discussion by email, and save the
messages in both directions.

Sometimes a journalist gives a vaguely affirmative-sounding or
sympathetic response which does not really answer "yes".  Examples are
"I will do this as much as I can" and "I understand the distinction."
Such an answer is actually just "maybe", so when you receive one,
please ask for clarification.  If he says that the editor has the
final decision, please respond with "Would you please consult the
editor now, and tell us a firm decision?"

Also please ask journalists to *see my speech* before the interview.
My speeches are not technical; they focus on precisely the sort of
philosophical questions that a journalist would probably want to
cover.  If the journalist does not attend my speech, he will probably
start by asking me to answer the same questions that I answer in the
speech.  That is inefficient.

Please ask each journalist to agree to make a recording of the
interview.  Written notes are not reliable, so I have decided not to
do that sort of interview any more.

It is also a good idea for the journalist to read
http://www.gnu.org/gnu/the-gnu-project.html and some of the articles
in http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/ before the interview.  Those
articles provide important background.  This is especially important
for anyone who cannot come to my speech first.

I am willing to meet with any number of journalists, but if there are
many, I can't meet all of them individually (it would take too much
time).  So what I will do is give private interviews to 2 or maybe 3
of them, whichever ones you think are most important, and see the rest
of them as a group (i.e. in a press conference).

You and the local people you know are better equipped than I am to
judge which journalists and which publications I should focus on.
Please try to judge both the importance of the publication and the
merits (intelligence, attention to accuracy, openness of mind, and
absence of bias) of the journalist, if you can.

If you schedule a press conference or group interview, please *plan
the time of my speech to allow the inteview after it*.  It may be a
good idea to find out from journalists what times are good for them,
then schedule the conference, then schedule the speech before it.
This way, they will all be able to get the full picture.


Recording my speech:

Please do record the speech if you can.  We are always looking
for good recordings of my speeches, both audio and video, to put
on line.

If you are making a recording, please *make sure* to tell me when the
tape needs to be changed.  I will pause.  I want to make sure the
recording is complete.


Putting my speech on the net:

If you would like to put my speech on the Internet, or distribute it
in digital form, that is ok provided you make sure that a user can
play the recording on a GNU/Linux system using only free software.
For instance, this means RealPlayer format is unacceptable.
OGG format is good for audio, and OpenDIVX is good for video.

This requirement is very important, because if it is not followed, my
own speech will entice people to do the exact opposite of what I urge
them to do.  That would undercut the whole point of the speech; the
medium would contradict the message.

Because this is so important, please make sure everyone who might be
involved in broadcasting the event, or who might be directly or
indirectly involved in planning such a broadcast, knows this
requirement in advance of the event.


Remote speeches by video connection:

I can do a speech remotely through a videoconferencing system.  I have
tried it using the internet, but video was so slow and gappy that I
don't want to try that again.  However, doing it by ISDN works well.
If I am at home, there is a facility I can use at no charge; you would
have to pay for the ISDN calls and for the facilities at your end.  If
I am somewhere else (which is true about half the time), then we will
need to find a videoconferencing facility for me to use; most likely
you will need to pay for that.


Warning about giveways:

You may find companies offering you CD-ROMs, books, fliers or
publicity materials to give away or sell at my speech.  Please check
them before you accept them, to make sure that they don't promote the
very thing that we are working to replace.

For instance, the CDs may contain non-free software.  Most commercial
CDs of GNU/Linux contain non-free software in addition to the free
software.  If it isn't the official Debian GNU/Linux system, it almost
surely contains non-free software, so please don't hand it out or
offer it at my speech.  Even if it contains the official Debian
GNU/Linux system, the publisher may have added some non-free software
to that, so it is necessary to check.

Books about use of the GNU/Linux system and about GNU programs are
fine if they themselves are also free.  But many of them are non-free
(see http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-doc.html).  To see if a book
is free, check the license on the back of the title page.  If it uses
the GNU Free Documentation License, or the Open Publication License
version 1 without options A and B, then it is free.  If it isn't one
of those, please show me the license and I will tell you if it is a
free license.

If companies send you publicity materials, please check with me before
giving them out at my speech.


Flights:

I am travelling most of the time, and most of my trips include several
stops.  Chances are your city is neither the first nor the last stop
in the trip.  So please don't make assumptions about the itinerary;
instead, please ask me for whatever information you need.

Many organizations ask to buy the tickets and send them to me.  That
is ok with me, but it typically assumes the trip goes to just one
city.  That approach usually won't work for a multi-destination trip,
unless you want to pay for the whole trip.  So normally I buy the
tickets myself and get reimbursed by the various places I am visiting.
For a multi-destination trip, we will need to agree on what parts of
the travel expenses you should cover.

Some organizations feel that hospitality calls for providing me with a
business class ticket.  That is indeed more comfortable, but an
economy class seat is good enough even on an overnight flight if it is
a window seat.  Meanwhile, speaking is my main source of income, and
the extra price of a business class ticket would be a lot more useful
for me if I can spend it on something else.  So if you were thinking
of spending extra for business class, how about if you pay the
extra to me as a speaker's fee instead?

We should plan for me to arrive at least 24 hours before the speech;
that way, even if the flight is cancelled, there is a good chance I
can still arrive in time for the speech.


Accommodations:

I am willing to stay in a hotel if that is the way you want to do it.

But if there is anyone who wants to offer a spare couch, or even some
spare floor, I would much rather stay there than in a hotel (provided
I have a door I can close to in order to have some privacy).  Staying
with someone is more fun for me than a hotel, and it would also save
you money.  Floor space is sufficient because I bring an air mattress
with me.

Note, however, that in a hot and/or humid place I need air
conditioning or I will be unable to sleep.  At 72 fahrenheit (22
centigrade) it becomes quite difficult except when the air is dry.

I sometimes like cats, but they are not good for me; I am somewhat
allergic to them.  So I need the bed and the room I will usually be
staying in to be clean of cat hair.  However, it is no problem if
there is a cat elsewhere in the house--I might even like them.  Dogs
that occasionally jump up on people frighten me unless they are tiny.
But if they only do that when we come in, I can cope as long as you
hold the dog away from me at that time.

If you put me in a hotel, please cover the costs of the telephone
calls I will need to transfer my email.  Some hotels charge a lot of
money for this.

Many countries have a law that hotels must report all guests to the
police.  In most cases, this intrusive policy applies not just to
foreigners like me, but even to citizens.  The citizens should be
outraged by this, but often they are not.

If your country has this policy, please join me in striking a blow
against Big Brother, by finding a place other than a hotel for me to
stay in.  I will be happier in my visit if I can stay in a place that
doesn't demand to see my passport.  If the police want to talk with me
about free software, they are welcome to come to my speech.

If you have found a person for me to stay with, please forward this
section and the two following sections to that person.


Beds:

Many people like hard beds, but they cause me muscle aches that keep
me awake.  In general there is no way you can determine for me whether
a bed is too hard; hardness is relative and we do not know how your
standards compare with mine.  But one data point is that futons are
always too hard for me.  I have tried many futons, and every one of
them was painful.  So if it isn't distinctly softer than every futon
you have ever seen, it is too hard.

If you don't know for a fact that I can sleep on the bed you have in
mind, please arrange to have on hand either a vacuum cleaner or a hair
dryer with a "cool" setting, so I can to inflate my air mattress if I
need it.

Hotel beds are often very hard; I cannot necessarily sleep on the bed
in the hotel.  But at least we can count on a hotel to have a vacuum
cleaner.

In case you are wondering, I cannot feel a pea under a mattress, but I
might feel a peanut under a thin mattress.


Email:

It is very important for me to be able to transfer email between my
laptop and the net, so I can do my ordinary work.  While travelling, I
often need to do the work and the transfer late at night, or in the
morning before a departure.  So please set up a way I can connect to
the net from the place I am staying.  If there is a computer on the
net which has a floppy drive, I can transfer the data via that
computer.

A modem connection is fine if it works, so please verify in advance
that the telephone line you expect me to use has a modular jack and
that it works to call the ISP from that line.  Hotels in Europe and
Asia often have peculiar phone systems; the staff may tell you it is
possible to call an ISP from the hotel *but they may be wrong*.  The
only way to tell for certain is to go to the hotel, try phoning with a
computer from a guest room, and see if it actually works.  Until you
have tested it, don't believe it!

I already have ISPs to call in the US and in some other places;
elsewhere, please find me a local ISP to call.  (It would be nice if
the account will continue working afterward, so that I can use it
again if I come back or from other places in the region.)  Hotel phone
fees may be significant, and I expect you to cover them.  However, I
normally connect to the net only for around ten minutes at a time,
twice a day, so it won't be too much.


Paying me a reimbursement or a fee:

Please pay my reimbursement or fee to me personally; do not send it to
the FSF.  The FSF and I have completely separate finances, and the FSF
never pays for my travel.  The FSF welcomes donations, but please make
sure that money intended to me is not sent to them, because moving it
afterward would mean accounting headaches as well as extra work.

My assistant is not involved with my finances, so he cannot help you
with that issue.  Please send questions about payments to me directly.

If you pay me by check, and you're not in the US, make sure to get a
check that lists a corresponding US bank--otherwise it will cost me a
fee to deposit the check.  Please mail the check to:

  Richard Stallman
  545 Tech Sq rm 425
  Cambridge, MA 02139
  USA

Do not mail it to the FSF!

A wire transfer is also a good method of payment.  I will send you the
coordinates; ask if you need them.  But note that a fee is always
charged for making the transfer--please don't take that out of what
you've agreed to pay me.

Cash is also fine.

If you are outside the US, please convert your currency to dollars in
your bank, then use one of the above methods to pay me the dollars.
My bank gives very bad exchange rates; yours is surely better.

If you want an invoice, I will be glad to give you one.  Let's work
out what it should say by email before I arrive.  Please also check
before the visit whether you need any other forms, such as tax forms.
I would like to be able to take care of any necessary forms while I am
there, rather than wait till afterward.


Food:

I enjoy delicious food, and I like most kinds of cooking if they are
done well (the exception being that I cannot eat anything very spicy).
So I like to go to restaurants that are good at whatever kind of food
they do.  I don't arrive with specific preferences for what kind of
food--rather, I want to have whatever is good: maybe the local
cuisine, or the food of an immigrant ethnic group which is present in
large numbers, or something unusual and original.

Some foods I dislike include:

   avocado
   dessert that contains fruit or liqueur
   fruits that are sour (grapefruit, most oranges)
   hot pepper
   liver (even in trace quantities)
   stomach and intestine; other organ meats

I often dislike foods that taste strongly of egg yolk,
and some strong cheeses.

It would be nice for you to ask around among your acquaintances to
find people who like good food and are familiar with the area's
restaurants.  They will be able to give good recommendations.


Sightseeing:

If I am visiting an interesting city or region, I will probably want
to do a few hours of sightseeing in between the work.  But don't try
to plan sightseeing for me without asking me first--I can only spare a
limited time for it, so I am selective about where to go.  Please
don't assume I want to see something just because it is customary to
take visitors there.  That place may be of no interest with me.
Instead, please tell me about possible places to visit--then I can say
what I would like.

I enjoy natural beauty such as mountains and rocky coasts, ancient
buildings, impressive and unusual modern buildings, and trains.  I
like caves, and if there is a chance to go caving I would enjoy that.
(I am just a novice as a caver.)  I often find museums interesting.

If there is a chance to watch folk dancing, I would probably enjoy
that.  I tend to like music that has a feeling of dance in it, but I
sometimes like other kinds too.  However, I generally dislike the
various genres that are popular in the US, such as rock, country, rap,
reggae, techno, and composed American "folk".  Please tell me what
unusual music and dance forms are present; I can tell you if I am
interested.

If there is something else interesting and unique, please tell me
about it.  Maybe I will be interested.


More arrangements:

Once we have a precise date for the speech, my assistant will contact
you with questions about the arrangements for the trip.  Please
respond as soon as possible with the information he asks for.

